Add README and documentation files, re-implement synchronous version of the accountability algorithm based on previous commits, add benchmark scripts to run experiments (#16)
mikanikos/Fork-Accountability: docs/2-fork-accountability.md

# Fork accountability

> As we know, the agreement property of the Tendermint consensus algorithm cannot be violated if there are at most *f* faulty processes in the system.

Reviewer: Remove "As we know".

Author: Fixed

> What happen if more than *f* processes are faulty?

Reviewer: Typo: "happens".

Author: Fixed

> A well-designed consensus protocol should provide some guarantees when this limit is exceeded. The most important guarantee is **fork accountability**, where the processes that caused the consensus to fail can be identified and punished according to the protocol specifications. 

Reviewer: Put "caused" between "".

Author: Fixed. Related question: when I say something like "a faulty process leads to a fork", should I put leads between "" as well? I thought it's quite clear what this means from the context but it's not indeed a formal term to define this action.

Reviewer: We should discuss this. I am not sure which level of formality we should use here. I guess Adi can help us with this decision.

## The problem

> 

Reviewer: We should "formally" define the problem here.

Author: I changed a bit the structure of this section, now the problem is better defined. What do you mean by "formally"? Is the new version fine?

We can separate two cases:

> - if the number of faulty processes is more than *2f*, we cannot do anything because faulty processes basically control the system and they can do whatever they prefer.

Reviewer: When we define a problem called "Accountability" or smething like that, we will say here that this problem can not be solved when there are more than 2f faulty processes.
However, it really can be solved with piggybacking justifications in every single message.
I think we should avoid mentioning this case.
If we still want to mention it, we would need to mention this "third" way of achieving accountability.

Author: I agree, I removed that case and just mentioned the case where the problem is addressed.

- if the number of faulty processes is less than *2f*, i.e.

      f < num. faulty processes <= 2f
      
  Agreement can still be violated but we're in condition to detect the processes that were faulty and punish them, for example by removing them from the validators set. 
  

> A **fork** happens when two correct validators decide on different blocks in the same height, i.e. there are two commits for different blocks at the same height. 

Reviewer: Put , (comma) after i.e.

Author: Fixed (even for all the other times I use i.e.)

In the context of the Tendermint protocol, a fork happens in height h when a quorum of messages (2f + 1 Precommit messages) are sent for different values, i.e. we have two sets of 2f + 1 Precommit messages, A and B, such that A has value v and B has value v' != v in height h.  

We aim to give incentives to validators to behave correctly according to the protocol specifications and detect faulty validators, without mistakenly detecting correct validators. 
 
## Fork reasons
 
There are multiple reasons that can lead to a fork, all coming from processes that deviate from the protocol specification and not following the behavior of a correct process.

We can summarize the most important ones:

- A process sends multiple proposals in a round *r* for different values

- A process sends a Prevote/Precommit message for an invalid value *v* in a round *r*

- A process sends multiple Prevote/Precommit messages in a round *r* for different values

- A process sends a Prevote/Precommit message for a value *v* despite having a lock on a different value *v'*

- A process sends a Precommit for a value *v* without having received at least 2/3 Prevote messages for *v* 

> Given this problem, we want to develop an accountability algorithm that, by analyzing the messages logs from each validator, is able to determine which processes respected the protocol and which ones didn't. 

Reviewer: Define message log.

Author: Changed the sentence and define message logs later in the document the first time is used.

> In order to prove the misbehavior of the processes that didn't respect the protocol, we want to show the proof of their faultiness respect to the Tendermint consensus protocol.

Reviewer: Typo: "with respect to..."

Author: Fixed

# Fork accountability

> The agreement property of the Tendermint consensus algorithm cannot be violated if there are at most *f* faulty processes in the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The agreement property of the Tendermint consensus algorithm cannot be violated if there are at most *f* faulty processes in the system, as we discussed in [1-tendermint-overview.md](./1-tendermint-overview.md).
```

Author: Fixed

What happens if more than *f* processes are faulty?

> A well-designed consensus protocol should provide some guarantees when this limit is exceeded. The most important guarantee is **fork accountability**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A well-designed consensus protocol should provide some guarantees when this limit is exceeded. An important guarantee is **fork accountability**, which is the topic of this document. 
```

Author: Fixed

In the context of the Tendermint protocol, a fork happens in height h when a quorum of messages (2f + 1 Precommit messages) are sent for different values: there are two sets of 2f + 1 Precommit messages, A and B, such that A has value v and B has value v' != v in height h.  

Tendermint conensus algorithm guarantees that a fork (i.e., a violation of the agreement property) cannot happen when the number of faulty processes is less than one third.
We address the problem of forks when there are more than one third of faulty validators:

    f < num. faulty processes <= 2f

In the Tendermint protocol, all processes should be accountable for their actions and faulty validators should be identified and punished according to the protocol specifications because they can "cause" the consensus to fail.
Fork accountability aims to detect these faulty processes that "led" to a fork and punish them, for example by removing them from the validators set.

We aim to give incentives to validators to behave correctly according to the protocol specifications and detect faulty validators, without mistakenly detecting correct validators. 
 
## Fork reasons
 

> There are multiple reasons that can lead to a fork, all coming from processes that deviate from the protocol specification and not following the behavior of a correct process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are multiple reasons that can lead to a fork, all coming from processes that deviate from the protocol specification in various ways.
```

Author: Fixed

> We can summarize the most important ones:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can summarize some of the most important misbehaviors:
```

Author: Fixed

- A process sends multiple proposals in a round *r* for different values

- A process sends a Prevote/Precommit message for an invalid value *v* in a round *r*

- A process sends multiple Prevote/Precommit messages in a round *r* for different values

- A process sends a Prevote/Precommit message for a value *v* despite having a lock on a different value *v'*

- A process sends a Precommit for a value *v* without having received at least 2/3 Prevote messages for *v* 

## Design of an accountability algorithm

### Interface and properties

> Given the problemas stated above, we want to develop an accountability algorithm that, by analyzing the messages received from validators during the execution of the consensus instance, is able to determine which processes respected the protocol and which ones did not and led to a fork. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the problem stated above, we want to develop an accountability algorithm that, by analyzing the messages received by validators during the execution of the consensus instance, is able to determine which processes respected the protocol and which ones did not and led to a fork. 
```

Author: Fixed

> In order to prove the misbehavior of the processes that did not respect the protocol, we want to show the proof of their faultiness with respect to the Tendermint consensus protocol.

Reviewer 2: I know your code already uses the term "faultiness". Another term we can use here, which is more common, would be "misbehavior". This is a matter of taste, however, so feel free to ignore this suggestion.

Author: I agree, it sounds better. Fixed.

The algorithm should expose the following interface:

- **detect(P)**: process P is faulty according the accountability algorithm

> The algorithm should guarantee the following properties:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The algorithm should guarantee the following properties (in the event of a fork):
```

Author: Fixed

- **accuracy**: if the accountability algorithm detects a process *p*, then process *p* is faulty

- **f+1-completeness**: the accountability algorithm eventually detects *f + 1* different processes

All the processes that are not detected are considered correct.

## Monitor

We introduce a trusted third-party verification entity which is responsible to run the accountability algorithm - we call it **monitor**.

The monitor is responsible to coordinate and run the accountability algorithm as soon as a fork is detected. 
The input of the algorithm are the message logs of the validators (i.e., all the information related to the exchanged messages by validators in the consensus instance). 
The monitor will first request the message logs from each validator and then will run the accountability algorithm.

> We assume that all validators keep track of all the messages they sent and received during the execution of the Tendermint consensus algorithm. 

Author: Fixed

The idea is that a correct process would be able to prove that it was not faulty by showing its activity (message logs) to the monitor.
Indeed, the monitor is able to detect all the faulty processes that caused a fork (and not only) by analyzing the message logs from all the correct processes.

## Fork scenarios

In order to better understand the problem, we analyze the scenarios when the fork can happen and how the monitor would be able to handle the situation when analyzing the logs for each validator.

### Fork in same round

If a fork happens in a certain round r (two decisions are made in the same round r for value v and v'), we know that at least f+1 processes have sent a Prevote/Precommit message for both v and v'.
Since at least one correct process will receive both messages, the monitor is able to infer all the "hidden" messages and eventually identify the faulty processes who caused the fork.  

> ### Fork in different rounds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Fork across different rounds
```

Author: Fixed

> If a fork happens in different rounds (value v is decided in round r1 and value v' is decided in round r2), we know that at least f+1 processes have sent a Precommit message for value v in round r and also sent a Prevote message for value v' in round r2 despite having locked value v when they sent a Precommit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a fork happens in different rounds (value v is decided in round r1 and value v' is decided in round r2), we know that at least f+1 processes have sent a Precommit message for value v in round r and also sent a Prevote message for value v' in round r2, despite having locked value v when they sent the Precommit of round r.
```

Author: Fixed

> Therefore, unless these processes have a justification (other 2f+1 Prevote messages for value v' in a round r'' s.t. r1 < r'' < r2), they are faulty. If they do have such a justification, then we now have to look for f+1 processes that sent Prevote messages for value v' despite having locked value v.

Author: Changed and tried to better explain this with a slightly more detailed description

As we can see, this is a recursive problem and we need to look back until we find f+1 processes that cannot justify the sending of a Prevote/Precommit message for another value despite having locked another one. 

> The method is simple: either a process is faulty because cannot justify the sending of a message or we go back recursively until we find processes that do not have a justification. It is clear that we will eventually find an iteration of the recursive problem where at least f+1 processes sent a Prevote message without a valid justification. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The method is simple: either a process is faulty because it cannot justify the sending of a message, or we go back recursively until we find processes that do not have a justification. It is clear that we will eventually find an iteration of the recursive problem where at least f+1 processes sent a Prevote message without a valid justification. 
```

Author: Fixed

## Challenges

It is possible to receive "altered" message logs and the monitor might not have enough information to detect all the faulty processes that led to a fork. 
However, we rely on the fact that Tendermint messages are signed and it is not possible to forge messages (i.e., some process *p* cannot state that it has received a message from process *p'* if *p'* did not send that message). 

So, excluding the previous problem, the following situations are possible:
 
- A process *p* denies having received a message *m* (*p*'s message logs does not contain *m* as a message received): this does not really affect the monitor's job because it does not contribute to create a fork and we can ignore this scenario  

> - A process *p* denies having sent a message *m* (*p*'s message logs does not contain *m* as a message sent): this can lead to a fork so we need to consider the fact that processes can do this to hide their faultiness. However, if *m* led to a fork, at least one correct process has received that message and we can identify the faulty process. 

Author: Fixed

### Communication between the monitor and validators

The communication between the monitor and the validators for receiving message logs of the Tendermint consensus algorithm is a crucial aspect of the monitor execution.

For example, what happens when the monitor does not receive message logs from one of the validators? Should this validator be considered faulty?

#### Synchronous model

If we model the communication with a synchronous model, the only option would be waiting some time to receive all the message logs before running the accountability algorithm.
After that time, if some process p did not send its message logs, the only thing monitor can do is considering p faulty, even though it does not have all the information to determine its faultiness with certainty. 
On the other hand, if it does not consider p faulty, the monitor might not be able to find all the faulty processes that led to a fork.

#### Asynchronous model

This method would work but we want to make no assumptions regarding the communication between the monitor and the validators. 

> If we do not make any assumption regarding the communication, we would realize that it is impossible to design an accountability algorithm where the communication between monitor and validators is completely asynchronous.

Reviewer: Let's tone down a rhetoric here with "it is impossible to design an accountability algorithm".
The reason is that this is highly not trivial because we would need to be extremely careful with defining a consensus algorithms that we want to "transform" into accountable algorithms.

So, my suggestion is to say: The approach given above does not work in this case.

Author: Fixed

In fact, it can happen that, by not receiving message logs from one message, we might end up mistakenly detecting correct processes because we do not have enough information to determine if a process has enough justifications to have sent a Prevote/Precommit message (accuracy property violated). 

If we want to design a correct accountability algorithm, we need to slightly modify the Tendermint consensus algorithm in order to correctly respect the accuracy property.
As we said above, we need to catch the case where a fork happens without having any process equivocating.

By looking at the other faultiness reasons, we can see that the critical case is when a process sends a Precommit message for a value v and then, in a later round, it sends a Prevote message for a different value than v.
The asynchronous accountability algorithm would work correctly if processes can justify the sending of a Prevote message: a simple solution is to attach the justifications to the Prevote message itself so that the accountability algorithm can directly check if the message has been correctly sent.

> This would be enough because, intuitively, there will be at least one correct process that has received both messages and it would be possible to track down the origin and the justifications and find out if a process is really faulty.

Reviewer: Again, it does not mean that this "one process" is correct.
Discussion today :)

Author: Fixed

Therefore, the monitor will be able to complete the accountability algorithm as soon as at least f+1 processes will be detected.
We also know that at least f+1 messages logs will be received by the monitor (we assume correct processes will send their logs). The algorithm will be able to complete the algorithm and respect the completeness and accuracy properties with the message logs of the correct processes.

## Algorithm design
 
To summarize the above discussion, these are the high-level steps carried out by the monitor to run the asynchronous accountability algorithm:

1. Upon a fork, monitor requests message logs from all the validators

2. Monitor runs the accountability algorithm to detect faulty processes upon receiving at least *f + 1* message logs and at every new message logs received when there are at least *f + 1* message logs 

> 3. While running the accountability algorithm, the monitor analyzes the received logs and build the correct logs for each process: for every message *m* that has been received by some other process but is not present in the sender's message logs, the monitor attaches *m* to the message logs of the sender of *m*. 

Reviewer: It is not clear what a "correct log" is.
But, this is nitpicking. We will discuss today the level of details we want to use here.

Author: Fixed

# Fork accountability

The agreement property of the Tendermint consensus algorithm can be violated if there are more than *f* faulty processes in the system, as we discussed in [1-tendermint-overview.md](./1-tendermint-overview.md).

A well-designed consensus protocol should provide some guarantees when this limit is exceeded in order to allow the system to recover from a possible fault. An important guarantee is **fork accountability**, which is the topic of this document. 

## The problem

> A fork is a split in the blockchain network or, with other words, a divergence into different block paths. 

Reviewer: "in other words"

Author: Fixed

We aim to give incentives to validators to behave correctly according to the protocol specifications and detect faulty validators, without mistakenly detecting correct validators. 
 
## Misbehaviors
 
In the previous section, we mentioned that a process can make the consensus fail with a fork. There are, indeed, multiple reasons that can generate a fork in the blockchain, all coming from processes that deviate from the protocol specification in various ways.

We can summarize some of the most important misbehaviors that can possibly cause a fork in a consensus instance according to the Tendermint consensus algorithm rules: 

- A process sends multiple proposals in a round *r* for different values 

- A process sends a PREVOTE/PRECOMMIT message for an invalid value *v* in a round *r*

- A process sends multiple PREVOTE/PRECOMMIT messages in a round *r* for different values (**equivocation**)

- A process sends a PREVOTE/PRECOMMIT message for a value *v* despite having a lock on a different value *v'*

- A process sends a PRECOMMIT for a value *v* without having received at least two thirds PREVOTE messages for *v* 

> Processes are considered correct if they do not make any of the above-mentioned misbehaviors.

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence. There are undetectable ways for processes to be faulty and they are not considered correct in the standard literature if they commit those.

Author: You're right, I was mentioning this in the scope of the accountability project though. Removed.

## Design of an accountability algorithm

We aim to develop an accountability algorithm that, by analyzing the messages received by validators during an execution of a consensus instance, is able to determine which processes respected the protocol and which ones did not and led to a fork. 
In order to prove the misbehavior of the processes that did not respect the protocol, we also want to show the proof of their misbehavior with respect to the Tendermint consensus protocol.

### Interface

The algorithm exposes the following interface (in the event of a fork):

- **detect(P)**: process P is faulty according to the accountability algorithm

### Properties

The algorithm guarantees the following properties:

- **accuracy**: if the accountability algorithm detects a process *p*, then process *p* is faulty

- **f+1-completeness**: the accountability algorithm eventually detects *f + 1* different processes

> All the processes that are not detected are considered correct.

Reviewer: Maybe we should state here that some of the undetected processes can be faulty.
Just to make sure that reader understands that we can not detect all faulty processes.

Author: I agree, good suggestion. Slightly changed the sentence to make this clear.

In conclusion, only two possible options remain:

1. at least *f + 1* processes have sent both PREVOTE messages for value *v* and *v'* in the same round *r*

2. at least *f + 1* processes have sent a PRECOMMIT message for value *v* in round *r* and also sent a PREVOTE message for value *v'* in a round *r''* (such that *r < *r'' <= r'*) without having delivered *2f +1* PREVOTE messages for value *v'* in a round *r'''* (where *r <= r''' < r''*)

## Challenges

It is possible that faulty processes send invalid message logs to the monitor. An invalid message log is a message log which contains partial or incomplete information regarding the actual messages sent and received by the owner of the log (this means some messages might have not been reported or listed in the log).
Indeed, a faulty process is able to alter and modify its message log in order to hide a possible misbehavior. In that case, the monitor might not have enough information to detect all the faulty processes that led to a fork. 

> We assume that messages exchanged in the consensus algorithm are signed and it is not possible to forge messages (i.e., some process *p* cannot state that it has received a message from process *p'* if *p'* did not send that message). 

Reviewer: Just to be more precise here we should say: if p' did not send that message or p did not received it

Author: Done

3. While running the accountability algorithm, the monitor analyzes the received logs: for every message *m* that has been received by some other process but is not present in the sender's message log, the monitor attaches *m* to the message log of the sender of *m*

4. For each validator, the monitor scans the received message logs and the inferred message logs and determines for each process whether it is faulty or not by analyzing the history of sent messages and transitions

5. When the monitor detects at least *f + 1* faulty processes, the algorithm completes

Termination is guaranteed by the fact that correct processes will send their messages logs and their message logs will be correct (no sent message will be missing). 
If this condition does not hold, the algorithm would not be able to identify correctly all the faulty processes that led to a fork. However, correct processes have no reason to misbehave or send invalid message logs. 

## Notes

- As some readers might have noticed, the fork accountability problem can be easily solved by simply piggybacking justifications in every single message. 

> However, this solution would be inefficient because it considerably increases the amount of information stored and exchanged by processes. The scope of the discussion is to solve the problem efficiently with a minimal amount of changes required on the Tendermint consensus protocol and that is the reason why we do not consider and analyze this possible solution.   

Reviewer: We should discuss this today.

Author: Added "future work" section to better explain this.

- By excluding the piggybacking solution of the previous point, the fork accountability cannot be solved when the number of faulty proccesses is greater than *2f*: in this case, faulty processes basically control the system and nothing can be done to solve the problem.

- The accountability algorithm is able to also catch other faulty behaviours that did not necessarily lead to a fork - this is a positive side effect of the accountability algorithm described above.

> - The monitor needs to analyze the message logs from the round of the first decision to the round of the second decision. Previous message history is not necessary to make the algorithm work. 

Reviewer: This is true from the perspective of the monitor.
However, participants of the consensus can not know when some process decided (at least in Tendermint we have right now).

Author: True, modified the sentence to make this clear.
